A network can be defined as a group of computers and other devices
connected in some ways so as to be able to exchange data.
-Each of the devices on the network can be thought of as a node; each
node has a unique address.
-Addresses are numeric quantities that are easy for computers to work
with, but not for humans to remember.
Example: 204.160.241.98
-Some networks also provide names that humans can more easily
remember than numbers.
Example: www.javasoft.com
Different addressig modes of a network are:
-Internet address
Consists of 4 bytes separated by periods
Example: 136.102.233.49
-InterNIC Register: organization in charge of the allocation of the
 address ranges corresponding to networks.
 -Domain Name System (DNS)
  Mnemonic textual addresses are provided to facilitate the manipulation
  of internet addresses.
  DNS servers are responsible for translating mnemonic textual Internet
  addresses into hard numeric Internet addresses
 -Ports
  An IP address identifies a host machine on the Internet.
  An IP port will identify a specific application running on an Internet host
  machine.
  A port is identified by a number, the port number.
  The number of ports is not functionally limited, in contrast to serial
  communications where only 4 ports are allowed.
 Data Transmission
-In modern networks, data are transferred using packet switching.
-Messages are broken into units called packets, and sent from one
computer to the other.
-At the destination, data are extracted from one or more packets and
used to reconstruct the original message.
-Each packet has a maximum size, and consists of a header and a data
area.
-The header contains the addresses of the source and destination
computers and sequencing information necessary to reassemble
the message at the destination.
A computer network can be categorized by their size. A computer network is mainly of four types:
-LAN(Local Area Network)
 Local Area Network is a group of computers connected to each other in a small area such as building, office.
 LAN is used for connecting two or more personal computers through a communication medium such as twisted pair, coaxial cable, etc.
 It is less costly as it is built with inexpensive hardware such as hubs, network adapters, and ethernet cables.
 The data is transferred at an extremely faster rate in Local Area Network.
 Local Area Network provides higher security.
-PAN(Personal Area Network)
Personal Area Network is a network arranged within an individual person, typically within a range of 10 meters.
Personal Area Network is used for connecting the computer devices of personal use is known as Personal Area Network.
Thomas Zimmerman was the first research scientist to bring the idea of the Personal Area Network.
Personal Area Network covers an area of 30 feet.
Personal computer devices that are used to develop the personal area network are the laptop, mobile phones, media player and play stations.
-MAN(Metropolitan Area Network)
A metropolitan area network is a network that covers a larger geographic area by interconnecting a different LAN to form a larger network.
Government agencies use MAN to connect to the citizens and private industries.
In MAN, various LANs are connected to each other through a telephone exchange line.
The most widely used protocols in MAN are RS-232, Frame Relay, ATM, ISDN, OC-3, ADSL, etc.
It has a higher range than Local Area Network(LAN).
-WAN(Wide Area Network)
A Wide Area Network is a network that extends over a large geographical area such as states or countries.
A Wide Area Network is quite bigger network than the LAN.
A Wide Area Network is not limited to a single location, but it spans over a large geographical area through a telephone line, fibre optic cable or satellite links.
The internet is one of the biggest WAN in the world.
A Wide Area Network is widely used in the field of Business, government, and education.
Interconnection
-Networks of low capacity may be connected together via a backbone
network which is a network of high capacity such as a FDDI network, a
WAN network etc.
-LANs and WANs can be interconnected via T1 or T3 digital leased
lines
-According to the protocols involved, networks interconnection is
achieved using one or several of the following devices:
→Bridge: a computer or device that links two similar LANs based on
the same protocol.
→ Router: a communication computer that connects different types of
networks using different protocols.
→ B-router or Bridge/Router: a single device that combines both the
functions of bridge and router.
→ Gateway: a network device that connects two different systems, using
direct and systematic translation between protocols.
Protocols
-Define the rules that govern the communications between two
computers connected to the network.
-Roles: addressing and routing of messages, error detection and
recovery, sequence and flow controls etc.
-A protocol specification consists of the syntax, which defines the kinds
and formats of the messages exchanged, and the semantic, which
specifies the action taken by each entity when specific events occur.
Example: HTTP protocol for communication between web browsers
and servers.
The OSI (Open Systems Interconnection) Data Model
-ISO standard for computer networks design and functioning.
-Involves at least 7 layers, each playing a specific role when
applications are communicating over the net.
-During the sending process, each layer (from top to down) will add
a specific header to the raw data.
-At the reception, headers are eliminated conversely until the data
arrived to the receiving application.
Diff Layers of OSI Model:
Physical layer: ensures a safe and efficient travel of data; consists of
electronic circuits for data transmission etc.
Data link layer: in charge of data encapsulation under the form of
packets and their interpretation at the physical layer.
Network layer: in charge of packets transmission from a source A to a
destination B.
Transport layer: in charge of the delivery of packets from a source A
to a destination B
Session layer: in charge of the management of network access.
Presentation layer: determines the format of the data transmitted to
applications, data compressing/decompressing, encrypting etc.
Application layer: contains the applications which are used by the
end-user, such as Java, Word etc.
The TCP/IP Model
 Consists of only 4 layers:
 Network layer
-Provides the same functionality as the physical, the data link and
network layers in the OSI model.
-Mapping between IP addresses and network physical addresses.
-Encapsulation of IP datagrams, e.g packets, in format understandable
by the network.
Internet layer
-Lies at the heart of TCP/IP.
-Based on the Internet Protocol (IP), which provides the frame for
transmitting data from place A to place B.
Transport layer
-Based on two main protocols: TCP (Transmission Control Protocol)
and UDP (User Datagram protocol)
Application layer
-Combines the functions of the OSI application, presentation, and
session layers.
-Protocols involved in this layer: HTTP, FTP, SMTP etc.
